chore(backend): add TLS certificate rotation documentation and helper scripts. Fixes #12328 (#12457)
kubeflow/pipelines: backend/README.md

## Updating API generator image (Manual)

This is now automatic on pushes to GitHub branches, but the instructions are kept here in case you need to do it
manually.

API generator image is defined in [Dockerfile](`./Dockerfile`). If you need to update the container, follow these steps:

1. Login to GHCR container registry: `echo "<PAT>" | docker login ghcr.io -u <USERNAME> --password-stdin` 
   * Replace `<PAT>` with a GitHub Personal Access Token (PAT) with the write:packages and `read:packages` scopes, as well as `delete:packages` if needed. 
2. Update the [Dockerfile](`./Dockerfile`) and build the image by running `docker build -t ghcr.io/kubeflow/kfp-api-generator:$BRANCH .`
3. Push the new container by running `docker push ghcr.io/kubeflow/kfp-api-generator:$BRANCH`.
4. Update the `PREBUILT_REMOTE_IMAGE` variable in the [Makefile](./Makefile) to point to your new image.
5. Similarly, push a new version of the release tools image to `ghcr.io/kubeflow/kfp-release:$BRANCH` and run `make push` in [test/release/Makefile](../../test/release/Makefile).

## TLS Certificate Rotation (Pod-to-Pod TLS)

### Context

> When pod-to-pod TLS is enabled (see PR #12082), backend components (API server, launcher, persistence agent, cache, metadata writer, etc.) use TLS certificates stored in Kubernetes Secret(s). These certificates expire and must be rotated periodically. Updating the Secret object does not automatically make running pods load the new certificate: a restart (rolling restart) of the affected deployments is required so that they mount/read the new secret.

Reviewer: You don't need to reference the PR here

This section documents a recommended, minimal process for renewing TLS certificates and applying them safely.

> ### Which secrets and components are typically impacted

Reviewer: You can remove "typically", as the same deployments will be impacted each time

kind delete clusters dev-pipelines-api
```

## TLS Certificate Rotation (Pod-to-Pod TLS)

### Context

> When pod-to-pod TLS is enabled, backend components (ml-pipeline-apiserver, metadata-envoy-deployment, metadata-grpc-deployment, ml-pipeline-persistenceagent, ml-pipeline-scheduledworkflow, and ml-pipeline-ui) use the TLS certificate stored in the Kubernetes TLS Secret `kfp-api-tls-cert`. These certificates expire and must be rotated periodically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When pod-to-pod TLS is enabled, backend components (`ml-pipeline-apiserver`, `metadata-envoy-deployment`, `metadata-grpc-deployment`, `ml-pipeline-persistenceagent`, `ml-pipeline-scheduledworkflow`, and `ml-pipeline-ui`)
For readability
```

Important operational behaviour: updating a Kubernetes Secret does not cause running pods to read the updated secret automatically. Pods mount Secrets as files or reference them via environment variables at container start time. To pick up rotated certificates, you must restart the pods that read those secrets (a rolling restart of the affected deployments).

This section documents a recommended, minimal process for safely renewing TLS certificates and applying them to a cluster that runs Kubeflow Pipelines.

### Which secrets and components are impacted

TLS certificates are stored in the Kubernetes TLS Secret `kfp-api-tls-cert` in the KFP namespace (commonly `kubeflow`).

Which secrets and components are impacted:

* `ml-pipeline-apiserver`
* `metadata-envoy-deployment`
* `metadata-grpc-deployment`
* `ml-pipeline-persistenceagent`
* `ml-pipeline-scheduledworkflow`
* `ml-pipeline-ui`

> **Note**

> > The `pipelines-cache` / cache deployment generally does **not** require the CA cert for inbound TLS from pipeline components; confirm whether your deployment references the TLS secret before restarting it.

Reviewer: Rename/syntax:
```suggestion
> The `cache-server`  deployment generally does **not** require the CA cert for inbound TLS from pipeline components; confirm whether your deployment references the TLS secret before restarting it.
```

kind delete clusters dev-pipelines-api
```

## TLS Certificate Rotation (Pod-to-Pod TLS)

### Context

> When pod-to-pod TLS is enabled, backend components (API server, launcher, persistence agent, metadata writer, and other pipeline-related deployments) use TLS certificates stored in Kubernetes Secret(s). These certificates expire and must be rotated periodically.

Reviewer: double-check the components listed in this line, should be a previous comment on this as well.

This section documents a recommended, minimal process for safely renewing TLS certificates and applying them to a cluster that runs Kubeflow Pipelines.

### Which secrets and components are impacted

TLS certificates are stored in the Kubernetes TLS Secret `kfp-api-tls-cert` in the KFP namespace (commonly `kubeflow`).

Which secrets and components are impacted:

* `ml-pipeline-apiserver`
* `metadata-envoy-deployment`
* `metadata-grpc-deployment`
* `ml-pipeline-persistenceagent`
* `ml-pipeline-scheduledworkflow`
* `ml-pipeline-ui`

> **Note**
> The `cache-server` deployment generally does **not** require the CA cert for inbound TLS from pipeline components; confirm whether your deployment references the TLS secret before restarting it.

> **Note**
> Confirm the exact secret name(s) and deployments used in your cluster before running commands. Example discovery commands:

```bash
kubectl get secrets -n <namespace>

# Find deployments referencing the secret
kubectl -n <namespace> get deploy -o name \
  | xargs -n1 kubectl -n <namespace> get deploy -o yaml \
  | grep -C3 "name: <secret-name>" || true
```

> ### Recommended rotation procedure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Certificate rotation procedure
```

> #### Prepare/obtain new cert and key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 1. Prepare/obtain new cert and key
```
Numbering the steps would add some readability to these instructions

Generate or obtain new cert files: `server.crt` and `server.key` (PEM encoded).

> #### Update the Kubernetes TLS secret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 2. Update the Kubernetes TLS secret
```

Replace <namespace> and <secret-name> with your cluster's values:

```bash
kubectl create secret tls <secret-name> \
  --cert=server.crt \
  --key=server.key \
  --dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl apply -f -
```

Example:

 ```bash
 kubectl create secret tls kfp-api-tls-cert \
    --cert=server.crt \
    --key=server.key \
    --dry-run=client -o yaml | kubectl apply -f -
 ```

#### Restart affected deployments (rolling restart)

Restart the deployments so they mount/read the updated secret:

```bash
kubectl rollout restart deploy -n <namespace> ml-pipeline-apiserver
kubectl rollout restart deploy -n <namespace> ml-pipeline-persistenceagent
kubectl rollout restart deploy -n <namespace> metadata-envoy-deployment
kubectl rollout restart deploy -n <namespace> metadata-grpc-deployment
kubectl rollout restart deploy -n <namespace> ml-pipeline-scheduledworkflow
kubectl rollout restart deploy -n <namespace> ml-pipeline-ui
```

Or restart all pipeline-related deployments discovered earlier.

> #### Verify rollout and pod readiness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4. Verify rollout and pod readiness
```

```bash
kubectl get pods -n <namespace>
kubectl rollout status deploy/ml-pipeline-apiserver -n <namespace>
```

Check logs for errors:

```bash
kubectl describe secret <secret-name> -n <namespace>
```

Optional: connect to the API server over TLS (from inside cluster or via port-forward) to confirm certificate in use.

Example (port-forward the API server service and test TLS locally):

```bash
kubectl -n <namespace> port-forward svc/ml-pipeline 8443:443

# Confirm the certificate presented by the server
openssl s_client -connect localhost:8443 -servername ml-pipeline 2>/dev/null | openssl x509 -noout -subject -issuer -dates
```

## Best practices & notes

> * Rotation interval: rotate certificates before they expire; recommended: track expiry via:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Rotation interval: rotate certificates before they expire. Track expiry with the following command:
```

```bash
openssl x509 -enddate -noout -in server.crt
```

* **Automation**: if using `cert-manager`, automate issuance and renewal, and consider automating rollout restarts (see below).
* **Minimize disruption**: perform rollouts during maintenance windows or low activity windows.
* **Auditing**: record rotation times and certificate fingerprints for traceability.
* **Validate**: after restarts, verify connectivity between components and watch logs for TLS handshake issues.

> ## Optional: automate restart after secret update

Reviewer: If Kubernetes as a rule does not automatically restart pods, why is this step optional? I think it can potentially confuse users. You could add this section as a 5th step under **Recommended rotation procedure**

Since Kubernetes as a general rule does not automatically restart pods after a secret is updated, it will likely be confusing to users if this step is labeled **optional**. Are there any cases where a user would not need to restart the pods after?
It might make more sense add this section as a 5th step under **Recommended rotation procedure**.
